[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> All of us are
familiar with dogs.
We've all lived in
and amongst dogs
even if we're not dog
lovers or dog owners.
We know lots of
dogs as individuals.
Every single one of them
biologically is a gray wolf.
They're not related
to gray wolves.
They actually are gray wolves.
Some of the breeds you
can really see that.
It's easy to
understand if we see,
like, any of the
Alaskan sled dog type
breeds or we see even
a German shepherd.
You can look at that and
go, I see the wolf in that.
But you start to
get down to, like,
a Shih Tzu or a pit bull
or a little terrier,
and you don't see the
gray wolf anymore.
You see that domestication
has changed them.
The gray wolf is Canis lupus,
and the domesticated dog
is Canis lupus familiaris.
And we add that trinomial part,
that last epithet to its name,
to designate that it's
been domesticated.
So you can see that as
something's moved away
from wild nature and
its diet is changed
and its environmental
conditions are changed
and, most importantly, probably,
sexual selection becomes
a factor--
we think a lot about
natural selection,
how the environment shapes us.
What we forget is the
incredible power wielded usually
by female of a species
to select mates,
and that will drive radical
changes in phenotypes.
With domestication, we get
into artificial selection.
So we change the environment.
So it's no longer
natural selection.
It's not the
environmental pressure.
And we become the
sexual selectors, who
we want to breed,
and over time, we
can-- in actually a fairly
short period of biological time,
we can take a gray wolf
and turn it to a chihuahua.
When we talk about a
purebred dog, the dog that
comes with papers, the dog that
can get into the Kennel Club,
that's actually a very
genetically weak animal.
It's come from a very
restricted gene pool.
So if it was a German
shepherd, they're
going to end up with hip
dysplasia almost every time.
There are pugs where
their entire face has
been sort of crushed forward.
They can't breathe anymore.
These are artifacts of
this sexual selection
we were talking about before.
So somebody says, I
like a German shepherd
with hips that are lower than
its shoulder blades, let's say.
And over time, if you look at
pictures of German shepherds
50 years ago, 60
years ago to today,
you'll see that they've gotten
that aesthetic-- that aesthetic
that people like in the German
shepherd has been selected for.
Oh, this female has it
and this male has it.
Let's breed them.
Oh, now let's take puppies
and keep breeding that
and keep breeding that.
So as we've done that, we've
ended up with these animals who
have all of these
artifacts, these
features that actually
impact their health.
We've done that with
a lot of species.
cows and sheep and goats.
And we've done that
with a host of plants.
We're working on mushrooms
and bacteria and algae
and all these things right
now, domesticating the world.
In the process--
I don't think we ever set
out to domesticate ourselves.
But in the process, we did.
It's important to understand the
timeline that this has happened
in, because human beings--
we get new archaeological
evidence all the time.
And now genomics and
genetics has shown us--
we're able to peer a little
bit deeper into our origins.
But we know that
we're at least--
in our current form, we're
something like 300,000 years
old as modern humans.
But humans as a
genus, genus Homo,
goes back a lot farther, right?
And all of us were
hunter gatherers.
That's our wild type.
Most of us only interact
with human beings
of the domestic type.
But the wild type
hunts and gathers.
Something between
10,000 and 14,000 years
ago, human beings started--
in the Fertile Crescent,
started to plant things.
We started to-- we
went from this idea
of tending to the wild.
And this is not a surviving,
hand-to-mouth kind of a thing.
People have gotten very good
at getting food resources out
of their environment
and also interacting
with the environment to
make it more productive.
We tended the wild.
We were like gardeners
of the wild landscape.
But this idea to start
planting starts around 10,000
to 14,000 years ago.
And very quickly, we
shift away from being
hunter gatherers in that area
of the world to being domestic.
This all starts, like,
10,000 years ago.
So again, if we took this
timeline, here's 300,000 years.
And this whole time,
we hunt and gather.
And then 10,000 years ago--
and it's not like 10,000
years ago-- we call this thing
the Neolithic Revolution,
the first planting.
It makes it sound like it just
caught fire and went around
the world.
I would point out that this is
not even a complete revolution
yet.
There are people
all around the world
still hunting and gathering.
But once we start
planting, now we
need to guard that area, right?
We need to weed it.
We need to till it.
We need to keep
animals away from it.
So people start to settle down.
And this is the first time
that we become sedentary.
Very quickly, shockingly
fast, out of that
starts to emerge
the city-states.
About 6,000, 7,000 years
ago, we start seeing
the first city-states emerge.
And what we have now
is enough surplus food
to create an environment where
you can have a class of people
who can sit at the top and
not have to forage anymore,
not have to hunt anymore.
In a hunter-gatherer
community, everybody's
like a sovereign individual,
and it's an egalitarian system.
Everyone does overlapping
jobs to make sure
that everyone's fed.
Everybody forages.
Everybody hunts.
The chief does, and the
runt of the litter does.
Everybody participates
equally and together.
But now you have
this system where,
through growing
grains primarily--
in Mesopotamia, we're
talking about wheat.
But if we get over to
Asia, another center
of domestication, we're
talking about rice.
If we go over to Mesoamerica,
we see another center
of domestication that arises
later based around maize
or what you now call corn.
We can produce surplus
food by doing this.
This is the first time
human beings have more food
than they can eat.
Hunter gatherers tend to have
this sort of daily subsistence
or weekly subsistence, right?
It's like we harvest
enough for what we need,
and as it runs down, we go
out and we get more of it.
The hunters go out when the meat
resource starts to be depleted.
The foragers go out when
the plant resource--
some is stored, but lots of
it's just sort of eaten up.
But for the first time, now we
have all this surplus grain.
And now we can feed more people.
So immediately what happens is
the population starts to grow.
And so you start to
have people settle down.
And then quickly, they
start to grow and multiply.
And then you start to
get a stratified society
because you need somebody to
sort of watch over the grain.
And then you need
somebody to determine
how to distribute the grain.
And then you've got to start
having rules about that.
So now you've got to have
sort of a legal class.
And, well, how do
you enforce that?
Well, now you need
an enforcement class.
Well, who sits on
the top of that?
You start to quickly develop
a hierarchical system.
Living in a hierarchical
structure where
you have a ruling class and
a policing and military class
and an educational
class and then you
get down to sort of a
worker class, that's
not our natural way of being.
We can make it work
to some degree,
but that's not our
biological norm.
>> Conquistadors and other
colonizers were not nice,
right?
We were going enslaving people
and clear cutting forests
and really just destroying
nature, destroying people.
We were killing machines.
I would have thought that those
people would have just thought
that we're evil.
But they were such humanists.
They were such lovers
of humans and life.
But they saw us as victims.
They thought that white
people had a disease
that they called Wetiko.
And they thought
it was a disease
of the spirit that led
us to just destroy things
unnecessarily.
This kind of
dominator mentality,
this domination of nature--
I mean, I'm trying to hold
on to that sensibility
that, no, people are
not intrinsically evil,
that we're in a system--
we're living on a game, on a
landscape that is not natural.
So we ended up with this kind
of dehumanized view of people
and this economy that
just-- by its very nature,
an economy that had to grow
in order to keep working.
So we started taking
stuff, just going to Africa
and going to South America and
just expanding by any means
necessary.
Really, as I see
it, that's the heart
of Wetiko, of what
this disease is.
It's mistaking an operating
system, really, for reality.
And once you do that,
it's really hard
to see your way out of it.
The indigenous people
had a heightened ability
to establish rapport that hadn't
been civilized out of them yet.
Making eye contact, being part
of an oral culture rather than
a literate culture
or television culture
means that you engage with
people by making eye contact,
syncing up your breathing,
seeing if their pupils are
getting larger or smaller
as you talk to them,
seeing if your head is making
micro motions of agreement.
Then the oxytocin gets
released in my bloodstream.
My mirror neurons
start flashing.
And it's a way of moving through
the world of always optimized
for connection and rapport.
And who is this?
How do we connect?
And if they do that,
even if they're
looking at a white
Western conquistador who's
been told to take his sword
and start killing people,
they look in the eyes
and they see, oh,
there's this human being there
that's being told to go kill
or to take, but,
wow, they're in pain.
They're suffering.
And how do I reach that person?
Indigenous people are in an
altered state of consciousness.
We're in this simulation.
We're so removed from nature.
We are in a CG
movie of the world.
We're walking around like
Spock with our smartphones
like tricorders as if
we're on an alien planet.
That's how separate we are.
>> We are not yet adapted
to living this way.
We don't really know
how to live this way.
We got domesticated and
didn't even realize it.
But unlike a dog, we wear more
of an invisible kind of collar
and an invisible
leash, because it's
like an unseen hand,
where the dog knows
you're the master, telling
it what it can and can't do,
setting the rules
and feeding it.
But we sort of have,
like-- we have a sense
in our culture of our freedom.
But we're much more
like free range cattle
than we are like free
human beings, told
that if we work hard we'll
have some kind of freedom.
But the thing is, we all
know, as we become adults,
it's kind of like a trap
and that you can't ever
really get free.
It'd be more fair to
say we're free range.
So at this point,
human domestication
is seven billion
people, most of whom
live on a giant human
factory farm where
we can move about freely, but
we don't have the true freedom
that hunter gatherers
had, and that's
the kind of freedom
most of us can't even
really imagine anymore.
>> You know, in most respects,
we're like the rest of life
on Earth.
It's interesting that,
particularly in the past 300
years, so many people seem
to have forgotten that.
Toni Morrison died recently,
the Nobel novelist.
She was saying that,
when she was growing up,
animals weren't incidental
to people's lives.
They were intimately
connected with their lives,
not as pets, but as part of
the ecosystem in which they
lived and depended.
Farmers had cattle and sheep and
not only that, other animals,
which they knew by name.
And we had an
intimate relationship
with the natural world
in every respect.
People understood the
pattern of seasons.
They understood the pattern
of weather formations.
They understood intuitively
the different characteristics
and personalities almost of
animals they worked with,
depended upon, lived from.
They're an intimate part
of the human economy,
as they still are in a
sense in parts of the world.
But then, in recent years, with
the growth of industrialism
and consumerism and the
systems of mass food production
and consumption, we've
become distanced from them.
Now our relationship
with animals
is reduced to often this rather
exaggerated sense of affection
for individual pets.
And people who have become
tremendously sentimental
about household pets
will nonetheless
sit by and watch the mass
slaughter of animals for food
and eat burgers at the table and
feed bits of them to their pets
with a kind of
dewy eyed sentiment
and not recognize the
carnage that's been wrought
on the planet as a consequence.
Toni Morrison's point
was that, that we
used to have this very intimate
relationship with animals
in our ecosystem.
Part of my point is,
in most respects,
we are just like the
rest of life on Earth.
Most of the creatures, the
mammals and the higher order
animals, have--
we know they have
feelings, sensibilities.
They have affections.
They mourn.
They grieve.
They exult. They raise children.
The fact they're a
different form of life
doesn't mean they're
separate from us
or that we should despise them.
We know this to be true.
But a big part of
what I'm marking for
is that we should
restore those connections
or at least restore our sense of
compassion for the rest of life
on Earth rather than
wreak the havoc against it
that we're doing.
But there are-- clearly,
there are some respects
in which we are different.
And it would be
silly to deny them.
In fact, on the contrary, it
behooves us to understand them
and to cultivate them.
For example, we are
sitting here surrounded
by advanced technology.
There are some things
that human beings
are capable of that no other
species has showed itself,
at least so far as we know.
It's hard to overestimate
the impact of industrialism.
Of course, it has its
roots in the 18th century
and a little earlier as a
force of economic change.
But it led to a massive
shift in the way people
lived and worked.
The great majority of people
in Europe and in the Americas
lived and worked in the fields.
But with industrialism,
they started
to migrate into the cities
to work in the factories
and to dig the roads
and build the railways
and create this massive
infrastructure that
was required.
And that needed a new
sort of workforce.
It needed people who were
literate to a certain degree,
who were numerate
to a certain degree.
But it really was divided
into several groups.
The vast majority of people
during the industrial period
were required to do manual
work, to tend the machines,
to wield the shovels, the
picks, and wield the hammers.
>> The hallmark
of industrialism,
really more than the steam
engine or anything else,
is the clock.
The power of the clock
in the Industrial Age
is that, before
the Industrial Age,
people would create
value and exchange it.
I'll make a candle
or make some shoes
and bring it to market and
exchange it with someone else.
And when the Industrial
Age happened,
what it was really about
was disconnecting people
from the value they created.
So instead of me making a pair
of shoes and selling them,
now it's me going to
work at a factory,
nailing one nail into
the bottom of a shoe
and handing it over
to the next guy.
And instead of selling my
value, I'm selling my time.
I'm working by the hour.
They put the clock up on the
clock tower as if to say, look,
it's all fair.
An hour is an hour.
Isn't that just?
But what's intrinsically
unfair is that I'm not
allowed to create value.
I'm only allowed
to sell my time.
And now, 500 years
later, 600 years later,
we see it as, well,
that's employment.
You just get a job,
and that's what you do.
You work 40 hours a week.
It's like, no, but
that's sort of the moment
that time is money was born,
because time was money.
It was all about time.
And then the only metric
that tends to matter
is the efficiency.
How much work can I get out
of someone in that hour?
How much value can I
extract in that hour?
So I want to increase
the efficiency.
And you'd stand next to
workers with a stopwatch
and see, how many
nails can they put
in the bottom of that
shoe in 30 seconds?
Well, get it down to 28.
Get it down to 20.
Once we start looking at people
as mechanisms through which we
extract value,
then it wasn't too
long until our education system
kind of flipped on its head.
The public education
was originally
invented as kind of a
mercy or a compensation.
It was so that the coal
miner could come home
after a day of work and
be able to read a novel
and appreciate it or be
able to read the paper
and then vote effectively
or intelligently.
It was compensation
for a life of hard work
so you could have the dignity
of having a mind that actually
functioned.
But slowly, over time and
I guess because of time
and the value of
efficiency, we started
to externalize job training
to public education.
>> There have
always been schools.
People have always been able
to get themselves educated.
What we're really
talking about are
the growth of systems of
mass public education.
And they really
have their origins
in most countries in the
sort of mid 19th century.
By mass public education,
I mean systems of education
that were initiated by
central governments, which
were available, sort of free at
the point of delivery in most
cases, and, in due
course, were compulsory
for certain age groups.
I mean, really, historically,
they're relatively recent.
These systems, in my view-- and
I've written quite a bit about
it--
grew up in the interests of
the Industrial Revolution
and, to some degree,
in the image of it.
They grew up because
of a need in part
to create a mass workforce for
this huge industrial complex
that was evolving,
because the rough equation
was that about
80% of people were
going to be selling
their physical labor
and maybe 20% would be selling
their intellectual labor.
And it was built that way.
So there was an
economic impulse.
That's the first thing.
The second thing
is that the system
was organized a bit on the
principles of mass production.
So people were selected
for certain roots.
Their kids went through
the system by age group.
This was a massive invention
to put the system into place.
But children were-- they went in
at a certain age, four or five.
They then went
through by age group.
They still do.
There are certain
points of selection
where some kids go that
way, some kids go that way.
People were selected according
to whether they were thought
to be more fit for manual work.
Maybe they might have the
sort of spark they thought
was needed for academic work or
a particular interest in that.
But they were sort of
divided into sheep and goats.
And then a few people went on
to university as a consequence.
So the organizational
principle was
very similar to mass
production systems.
It was based on standardization,
conformity, selection,
and it was also
geared to selecting
a particular type of commodity
with a particular sort
of product at the far end.
So what you had evolving
over that period
was a kind of pyramid.
There was a broad base of
people who were doing--
who were being educated to a
certain level of basic numeracy
and literacy.
There was a group
slightly higher
than that who would be going
on to administrative work
and certain sorts of
managerial type jobs
and then a group that
would be educated
to take on these sort of
higher leadership roles.
And the system was
composed in that image--
broad base of
elementary education,
the slightly narrow band of sort
of high school, middle school
and high school, and then
quite a narrow band of people
who went on to university.
And like any system of
mass industrial production,
it was predicated on generating
a fair amount of waste
materials because not everybody
was suited to the task
that they were
being groomed for,
and so they went to one side.
And I think it was at that
point we invented the whole idea
of educational disability.
>> I mean, there's a model.
It's the Prussian
model of education
where the school is
modeled after the factory
with bells ringing after
each period and the teachers
like the foremen and the
students follow the directions.
So now we've got the
principals of our high schools
and the presidents of
our colleges meeting
with the CEOs of
corporations to find out,
what do you want our
students to learn?
What do you want them to
know so they can get jobs?
How do you want
us to train them?
So corporations are just
externalizing employee training
to the schools.
If anything, you're doing
the opposite of education.
You're not creating inquisitive,
open, creative, disruptive
minds.
You're not going to
favor liberal arts.
In a modern age,
this is where we
get what we keep calling STEM.
This is science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics.
Beautiful.
But why do we want
to teach STEM--
so that they learn
how to program
so they can go and make
computers for Silicon Valley
and get jobs.
No, we don't want them
to learn the humanities,
because then what?
Then they're going to start
to question the whole thing.
Critical thinking makes
you look outside the frame
of corporate capitalism and
say, well, wait a minute,
where's the meaning in this?
What's the future in this?
What are we externalizing
to nature, to women,
to other people?
So unless you are able
to do critical thinking,
you're not educated at all.
>> It's one of the reasons why
I think it's very important that
we move away from some idea of
standardization and conformity
and recognize that individual
achievement, individual values,
individual potential in lives
are as various as the people
we're talking about.
Education has to
become individualized.
And if you
standardize it, you're
bound to create a catastrophe
for some people that
would be avoidable if you
saw them as individuals.
A wonderful woman, when
she was a young kid
in elementary school,
was in constant trouble.
She didn't pay attention.
She fidgeted a
great deal and tend
to get up and wander around.
Eventually, the school
contacted her mother
and said that they thought
Gillian had a learning
difficulty.
And they explained to
her what she should do
and that she should take
Gillian to see a specialist.
And her mother was naturally
devastated to hear that.
He asked to go and
sit at the far end
of the room on
this leather sofa,
and he talked to her mother
about all the problems
Gillian was having and
asked her to describe them.
And she said, all this time that
her mother was speaking to him,
he was staring at Gillian.
And she said, I
was uncomfortable,
and I was sitting on my
hands so I wouldn't fidget.
This went on for
several minutes.
And then he stood up
and he said to Gillian,
look, this has been
very interesting,
Gillian, but I need to speak
to your mother privately now.
So if you wait here,
we're going to leave you,
but we'll be back.
We won't be very far away.
We'll come back
in a few minutes.
And she said they got
up and they went out.
But as they went out, he
leaned across his desk
and turned the radio on.
And he got into the
car, apparently,
and he turned to her mother
and said, just stand here
for a moment and watch her.
See what she does.
She said there was a
window back into the room.
So she couldn't see them,
but they could see her.
She said the minute they
were out of the room,
she was on their feet
moving to the music.
She said she danced
around on top of the sofa
and on the tables.
And she said, because she'd
been sitting still for so long.
They watched this for
a couple of minutes,
and he turned to mother,
and he said, you know,
Mrs. Lynne, Gillian isn't sick.
She's a dancer.
Take her to a dance school.
And she did.
She went to the
Royal Ballet School.
And she said, I
walked into this room.
And she said, I'll
never forget it.
It was full of people like me,
people who couldn't sit still
and, as she put it, people
who have to move to think.
She was eventually accepted
into the Royal Ballet,
and then she became a soloist,
a principal and a soloist,
and had a wonderful career
at the Royal Ballet,
traveled the world with them.
And then, when she
left, she formed
her own company, the
Gillian Lynne Dance Company,
put all kinds of productions
on in Broadway in the West End.
And then she met
Andrew Lloyd Webber
as an accomplished and
very successful dancer
and choreographer at this point.
And Andrew asked if
she would choreograph
"Cats," which she did,
and "Phantom of the Opera"
and other of his productions.
She became his
principal choreographer.
She went on to give
pleasure to millions
and became a multi-millionaire.
And it's perfectly possible
these days that somebody else
would tell her to sit down, calm
down, and take these tablets.
And she wasn't sick.
She was a dancer.
And I feel this for an
awful lot of people,
that if you stereotype people
against a very narrow view
of ability, then
you automatically
generate a very big
conception of inability
and, at worst, of disability.
A lot of what goes on
in our school systems
is not the result
of legislation.
It's the result of
habit and ritual.
There is nothing anywhere,
really, in most of our systems
that requires that we
educate kids by age group.
We just do because
we think you have to.
But you don't.
And outside the schools, we
wouldn't think of doing that.
When kids leave
school at 3 o'clock
in the afternoon
or 4 o'clock, we
don't say, now, all
the four-year-olds
be sure to go over there.
Keep away from eight-year-olds.
Bad things happen, we know.
Communities are
intergenerational.
We don't have to divide
the day into subjects.
We just do.
You don't have to.
There are lots of great
schools that don't do that
and having wonderful
success as a result.
Creativity is one of the
defining characteristics
of our species.
It's one of the things
that makes us human.
We create the lives that we live
through the possibilities we
see and the
opportunities we take
or the ones we step away from.
It's how people's
lives are transformed
by discovering a
talent and the passion
and the purpose
that goes with it.
That's what the Gillian
Lynne story is about.
Creativity, in other words,
isn't some exotic byproduct
that happens to be
present in a few people.
We've come to think
of it that way.
But it's not true.
Creativity is the
pulse of human life.
We live in a city that wasn't
here 150 years ago like this.
This is being created by the
interplay of millions of minds
working together,
collaborating, where all of us
now based in the great
net of the world wide web
and all of its works.
This is new to our generation.
This didn't happen before.
It didn't come into being.
It's not-- it didn't come
around like the oceans.
We made this.
Somebody designed the
clothes that we wear.
Creativity is what contributes
to the nature of our humanity.
We can use it and
we can misuse it.
So, to me, saying that
education should cultivate
children's creative
capacities isn't
kind of an appeal to
have some extra hour
of free play-based activities
on a Friday afternoon,
though I think we should have
free play-based activities
on a Friday afternoon.
It's to recognize that
there is a set of capacities
here, which isn't
separate from, but it's
integrated with everything
else that we do.
>> According to Ray Kurzweil,
the VP of Technology of Google,
by 2029, all of us,
within our pockets,
will have our own personalized
artificial intelligence.
This is also going to be true
for kids in the developing
world because the cost of
smartphones and tablets
is going to drop to $10 apiece.
What this means
is that all of us
are going to have
a backup brain.
Sugata Mitra won the
TED Prize for Education.
I once heard him speak.
And he said, the way we
educate our kids is ridiculous.
So someone asked, what do
we need to stop teaching?
And he said, stop teaching
spelling, stop teaching math,
because our kids are going
to have a backup brain that
can already do that.
Why are we teaching them skills
that were needed in 1970?
So then the question is,
what do we teach our kids?
Well, we teach our
kids transformation.
There's a difference between
learning and transformation.
Learning is facts and figures.
Learning is stuff that
you easily forget.
But transformation is different.
Transformation is
beyond learning.
Transformation is an
expansion of your world view.
And a mind, once
expanded, can never again
shrink to its original size.
Once your world view changes
where you become more authentic
or you become more
empathetic and kind
or you become more compassionate
or you become more autonomous,
you never lose that sense.
Now, philosophers and
anthropologists and professors
who study transformation
say that transformation
in the world today
comes from two things.
The first is the
disorienting dilemma.
It is the setback,
the suffering,
the thing that pounds you
and knocks you off course.
But when you bounce back
from that bankruptcy
or from that broken heart
or from that divorce
or from that bout in
hospital, you are wiser,
and you see the world
in a different way,
and you know what you need to
do next to avoid that setback.
Google did a study.
This was cited in Salim Ismail's
fantastic book "Exponential
Organizations."
Google found that its
best people were not,
contrary to popular belief, STEM
graduates, but young people who
had gone through suffering and
had emerged from that suffering
humbler, kinder,
more compassionate.
Those were the best people.
Now, transformation
comes from suffering.
But it also comes from a gradual
expansion of meaning schema.
This gradual expansing
of meaning schema
is when we learn from mentors,
when we travel the world, when
we're introduced to people
who have figured it out
and they are willing to
help us figure it out,
when we wisen up.
The point of education has to
be to speed up the accumulation
of meaning schema--
in short, to speed up wisdom,
to speed up transformation
so that the human
machine doesn't
have to go through suffering.
And when we do go
through suffering,
we know how to sail past
it and see it as a lesson.
So the problem
with our education
is it isn't paying
enough attention
to helping people
transform by teaching them
new definitions
of relationships,
new definitions of
love, by teaching them
that the dogma of
organized religion
can often create
pain and setback
and to teach them new
models of spirituality,
to teach them creativity, to
teach them entrepreneurship,
to teach them that
love doesn't have
to come from outside forces--
it can be generated within--
that you are enough as
you are, no matter what
your parents or your
teacher or your preacher
or the media says.
There are so many different
components of transformation
that we can serve up to
our children, yet we don't.
We teach people biology.
But we did not teach them
how to extend their lifespans
and exist in a healthy way.
We teach people morality,
but we don't teach them
how to truly be
compassionate and empathize
with other human beings.
We teach people accounting,
but we don't teach them
how to be an
entrepreneur and how
to deal with the
setbacks and the failure
that you might face when
you go on that journey.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> You know, we're living at
a time when one of the most
serious epidemics, one the most
serious threats to human health
and well-being around
the world is depression,
depression at a time when we
are materially better off than
at any time in the
history of our species.
But our spiritual lives
are a mess in most cases.
And there are all kinds
of reasons for it.
But people lack a
sense of well-being,
lack a sense of fulfillment.
Many of these things
are the consequence
of false conceptions about how
people work, how they connect.
>> All of us, whether you live
in the Western world or you
live in a very
traditional society,
like in India or in China,
we are all like fish swimming
in water.
A fish swimming in water cannot
see and has no idea that it is
in water because it is
so immersed in water.
Likewise, when we
live in this world,
we are immersed in the
culturescape, a tangled
web of rituals, beliefs,
ideologies, dogma,
ideas spread from generation
to generation to generation.
But we don't know that all of
this exists solely in our head.
Ken Wilber says that there
are two types of reality.
There is absolute truth.
Absolute truth is
this rock is hard,
and if I hit you on the
head with this rock,
it's going to hurt.
Every society, every
culture can agree to that.
And then there's relative truth.
And relative truth is the ideas
that we have individually,
culture by culture by
culture, on love, marriage,
relationship, the definition
of ideas like success,
career, the 9:00 to 5:00, our
ideas of God or what is right
or what is wrong or morality.
And so a lot of the stuff
that's stressing this out
is stuff that doesn't
actually exist.
It doesn't exist.
It simply exists
in our own heads,
in this realm of relative truth,
because we were conditioned
to believe that it is so.
>> If I'm identifying as body,
if I'm moving through the world
as separate object body, whether
it's my mind, my role, my job,
my title, my weight, my
gender, my sexual orientation,
whatever aspect of this that
I'm rooted in this identity--
this is who I am--
or my current emotion--
anger, frustration-- if I'm
moving through the world
from that place, that's object.
That's body, even
the emotional stuff.
It's chemistry and
electricity in my brain.
I'm then going to
respond to you as object.
There's separation between us--
one object over here, all this
huge chunk of empty space.
There's another
object over there.
So we're all separate.
As long as I'm moving
through the world
as separate disconnected object,
not only am I going to suffer,
but I'm going to bring
about suffering in the world
because it's disconnected.
It's an object.
So an object can
only be two things.
Either you're something that's
going to be of benefit to me--
I can use you to get ahead or
for my own personal pleasure,
whatever it may be--
or you are an
obstacle on my path.
And so whether you
are a human being,
whether you are a tree,
whether you are a river,
either I'm going to use you
or I need to remove you.
In either case, I'm going to
bring about suffering for you.
We've lost our
connection to truth.
connection to spirit.
We've lost our
connection to source.
We've lost our connection to
the oneness of consciousness
that flows through us.
And so our lives hurt.
And we blame the stock market.
And we blame interest
rates and mortgage rates.
And we blame the traffic.
And we blame our weight.
And we blame our employers and
our employees or our spouses
or our lack of spouses
or our children
or our lack of children
or whatever it may be.
But, ultimately, the
problem is that we're
moving through the world
with a broken connection,
and so it hurts.
>> People have social-emotional
problems if they don't connect
with each other or if
they're kept apart.
It's like social
media at the moment.
I think it's a total misnomer.
These are not social media.
These are for the most
part anti-social media.
They're not helping
people connect.
They're disabling
people's capacity
to connect on a personal level.
>> You have a
conversation on Skype,
and the person on the
other end agrees with you.
But because you can't see
their pupils getting larger,
you can't see
their head nodding,
your body doesn't get
the sense of agreement.
Your mirror neurons don't fire.
The oxytocin doesn't
get transmitted.
And you trust humans less
because they're not giving you,
you know--
they're not triggering the
sort of painstakingly evolved
social mechanisms that we
have that we've developed
over 600,000 years of evolution
to bond with other people
and do the necessary
collaboration and social group
formation.
>> We delude ourselves into
thinking we're connecting with
other people
through our devices.
With social media, you
measure your insides
by other people's outsides.
I don't look up and see some
celebrity in a sports car
and say, that could be me,
but a lot of people do.
And that's what media and
social media teaches you.
It teaches you, if I work hard,
I can be the next whomever.
No.
Accept who you are today.
And yeah, you can try to
make your life better,
but know the things that are
going to just make you happy,
and it's going to be the quality
connecting with other people,
being grateful for
what you do have.
So all the things
that we're taught
by social media and the
media that will make us happy
actually make us miserable.
And ironically, I
live in a culture
with the inalienable
right to pursue happiness.
You cannot pursue happiness.
It's not-- it's a ramification.
Happiness is a byproduct.
So what you need to
do is sleep correctly.
Have loving relationships.
Eat well.
Get some exercise.
It's not brain surgery.
And yet, 100 million
prescriptions
for antidepressants are
written in this country
of 330 million people.
I mean, this is an insane
time we're living in.
All of us have our phones.
Some of the times they're
under our pillows.
I don't know anyone who
doesn't go to the bathroom
without an iPad or
something in there.
>> Kids who were raised with
social media likes are already
quantized.
They're already quantifying
their understanding
of themselves.
So the problem with it is--
to me, it's almost less
about that it's specifically
social media, but that
their sense of self-worth
is external to them
rather than experiential,
that it's something telling
me how much I'm worth.
And it's not even human.
When it's a number,
then it's not actually
feeding my organism.
It's feeding some
accountant inside myself.
That might be
Wetiko right there.
That's the disease,
this quantified self.
>> How we are in the world,
how we relate to each other,
how we relate to the planet
is part of the problem.
And unless we get
to the root of that
and start to think in a more
integrated, more holistic, more
humanistic way about our
place in the order of things,
then we'll simply continue
refining a system that's
run its course, and this creates
all the problems that we now
scratch our heads about.
We've created the food crisis.
We've created the
economic crisis.
climate crisis.
And if we're to
solve them, we have
to get even more
creative, not less.
>> You know, we justified
our competitive landscape.
We justified this
system with a kind
of a bastardized
interpretation of Darwin.
Species compete,
and one succeeds,
and that's why humans
are on the top.
We won.
We're the apex
predator, and yay.
And I looked-- I read Darwin.
And if you read
Darwin, I mean, there's
a little tiny bit
on competition.
But for the most
part, what Darwin
is marveling at
page after page is
cooperation and collaboration
between species.
But I remember the
science teacher
who taught me about
evolution and said
that the trees are competing
for sunlight in the forest.
And the big tree will
get up to the sun first,
and the little tree will be
in the shade and will die.
And I've just read this
book, "Secret Life of Trees,"
and it turns out
just the opposite,
that the big tree that's
getting the sunlight
shares its nutrients
through the soil
through a matrix of mycelia--
of mushrooms in the soil--
with the little tree.
And then the little tree
gets all those nutrients.
Then, in the winter when the
big tree loses its leaves,
the little tree, which
is usually an evergreen,
passes nutrients back
through those same mushrooms
and give the nutrients
back to the big tree.
So the two trees are
not competing for sun.
They're collaborating.
They have diverse
strategies of survival,
which allows the forest
as a collective organism
to support itself.
So if human beings are
the most advanced species
on the evolutionary
trail, it's just
a reflection of the
complexity of collaboration
that we were able to do.
>> Human beings are
very programmable.
They can be programmed
towards ideas
that unify them and
create more compassion
and love in the world.
But they can also be
programmed for ideas that
create this unity and hate.
The question is, where
is the human race going,
and what do we want to bet on?
I believe that we are moving
more and more towards unity.
And if you look at issues
like global warming,
no country on its own can
prevent global warming.
The only way to do it is to
do it as a collective species.
No country on its
own can prevent wars.
The only way to do it is to do
it as a unified human species.
>> It's not only feasible,
but it is already happening.
And a lot of people are throwing
their hands up about this
and say, how can you
possibly change us?
Well, the fact is you can if you
give people a better argument,
if you open their eyes to
more profound principles
of human welfare
and flourishing,
if you persuade them
in the right way
that this is a better way to
do things and then show them
how it can be done, how
other people are doing it.
But then movements start to
happen, and they do happen.
And you can see it now.
You can see it in the
environmental world with Greta
Thunberg and the rest who are--
one person becomes
a dozen people
becomes several thousand,
and then you have a movement.
And I think, if there's
the appetite for change
and the impulse for change
and I feel it happening,
then the ideas are out there.
The practices are there
to help make it a reality.
>> First, we need to
figure out, who am I?
The most important
aspect is, how do I
move through the world as that?
And then, OK, what
is my unique way
that that's going to manifest?
Maybe I'm a school teacher.
Maybe I'm the waitress who
serves up smiles with muffins,
whatever I may be.
But that is all in service
of that higher purpose, which
is to wake up.
And so that connection to the
children, the grandchildren,
the future, to the
Earth, that connection
is what will save our species.
So whether you're talking
about personal depression,
personal addiction,
personal sense of misery,
or you're talking about
planetary destruction,
at the very core, the
answer is the same--
connection, oneness.
[MUSIC PLAYING]